      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763299 Date: 02/13/2016


                                                                                                RELEASE IN
                                                                                                PART B5,B6




From:                             Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sent:                             Wednesday, August 05, 2009 12:12 AM
To:
Subject:                          FW: background briefing on north korea, internal transcript


Fyi â€” transcript of briefing


From: Vietor, Thomas F. [mailto:
Sent: Tuesday, August 04, 2009 11:5/ FM
To: Mills, Cheryl D; Abedin, Huma; Reines, Philippe I
Subject: FW: background briefing on north korea, internal transcript

This is the backgrounder we just did


From: Eckert, Ellen E.
Sent: Tuesday, August 04, 2009 11:55 PM
Subject: background briefing on north korea, internal transcript

                                                THE WHITE HOUSE

                                       Office of the Press Secretary


Internal
Transcript                                                                                                   Aug
ust 4, 2009


                                      PRESS BACKGROUND BRIEFING
                                           ON NORTH KOREA
                                  BY SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL

                                             Via Conference Call


10:45 P.M. EDT

     MR. McDONOUGH: Hey, everybody. Thank you very much for waiting for
us, and apologies for making you wait. We do appreciate very much the
opportunity to get on the phone here and just talk you through a little
bit of what's transpired over the last couple days.

     I do think it's worth noting that earlier tonight, between 8:30 p.m.
and 9:00 p.m. eastern time, the President did call family members of both
Euna Lee and Laura Ling to express his relief that their families will be
reunited here shortly.

     I'm going to turn it over to one of my colleagues -- senior
administration official colleagues here to talk through several important
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. FA-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763299 Date: 02/13/2016
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763299 Date: 02/13/2016




data points as it relates to the last several days and then we'll open it
up to your questions, mindful of the fact that it's late in the night here
and everybody wants to get some rest. I'd just remind everybody that this
call is on background and let me turn it over to my senior administration
official colleague.

        SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: Good evening and thanks for joining
US.

     I want to not just go back a couple of days, but go back a few months
here to give some context to the events of today in Pyongyang. Today's
events reflect an awful lot of work over a couple of months on behalf of
two United States citizens who were detained in North Korea and also the
very fine work of President Clinton and his team in North Korea today.

     As I think most of you know, on March 17, 2009, North Korea border
guards seized and detained two American journalists, Laura Ling and Euna
Lee, while they were filming for former Vice President Al Gore's Current
TV along the China-North Korean border. Since their being detained the
President and Secretary of State directed that we in the administration
take every appropriate step to look out for the safety of these Americans
and expedite their release.

     On June 8, 2009, Laura Ling and Euna Lee were convicted on charges
brought by the North Koreans and were sentenced. to 12 years of hard labor
in a labor camp. As the State Department has briefed -- and the set-up
here, as you know, we don't have relations, formal diplomatic relations
with the North Koreans, so that we have in Pyongyang what's called a
protective power, a protecting power, and it's the Swedish government.

     The Swedish ambassador in Pyongyang, acting on our behalf, provided
consular services and got mail and medicine to the two women. At our
request Sweden also pressed very hard to ensure their safety and good
treatment, and were very appreciative of that good work by the Swedes,
especially Ambassador Mats Foyer in Pyongyang.

     Through the Swedish ambassador and other channels, as I said, we
repeatedly pressed the North Koreans to agree to the quickest posture
release of the two journalists and the guarantee of their well-being in
the meantime. During this time we in the State Department maintained very
close contact with the families of the two journalists, talking to them
daily, briefing them on efforts each week. And as you know, Secretary
Clinton met with the families in person in May.

     In response to our many requests, the North Korean authorities at a
point during the spring began allowing Ms. Ling and Ms. Lee to call their
families periodically, and family members, they shared their readouts of
these calls with us. Often Ms. Ling and Ms. Lee reported what the North
Korean officials were telling them.

     In mid-July, during one such phone call, Ms. Ling and Ms. Lee shared
what the North Koreans had told them -- that they would be willing to
      UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. r-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763299 Date: 02/13/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763299 Date: 02/13/2016




grant them amnesty and release the two Americans if an envoy in the person
of President Clinton would agree to come to Pyongyang and seek their
release.

     This, as I said, was reported by family members to us, and to Ms.
Ling and Ms. Lee's employer, former Vice President Al Gore. Both the
families of former [Vice] President Gore asked us in the United States
government to assist in seeing if President Clinton could go on a
humanitarian mission, and if he did, whether such a trip would be
successful in securing the release of Ms. Ling and Ms. Lee.

     The National Security Advisor and our team here did quite a bit of
due diligence on this issue through a variety of channels and a variety of
means to seek a judgment -- to make a judgment as to whether or not if in
fact President Clinton did go to Pyongyang, that he would be able to
successfully secure the release of our two American journalists there. As
I said, we did a lot of due diligence on this through a variety of
channels, and worked this issue very hard.

     During the weekend of the 24-25 of July, the National Security
Advisor spoke with President Clinton about his willingness to take on this
mission and as we indicated, Vice President Gore, on behalf of the
families, had already been in touch with President Clinton about this.

     So the families and Vice President Gore made their appeal to Bill
Clinton to go to Pyongyang. We spoke to him over that weekend. President
Clinton indicated that he would be willing to undertake this mission as a
private, humanitarian mission if there were a reasonable chance of getting
Ms. Ling and Ms. Lee released. We continued to do our due diligence on
this issue. We considered the request carefully. We tested directly with
the North Koreans repeatedly. We sought and received North Korea's
agreement in fact that a visit by President Clinton would secure the
release of Ms. Ling and Ms. Lee.

     During the course of these discussions, it was insisted that the
North Koreans acknowledge, as former President Clinton's visit was not any
part of a negotiation, it was not in any way connected to the nuclear
issue or other issues that we have a government-to-government basis with
the DPRK, including their noncompliance with international obligations and
behaviors that have been the subject of Security Council resolutions and
statements and actions by our government and other governments in the
international community.

     The North Koreans confirmed to us directly that they accepted his
visit in a private capacity that exclusively focused on the humanitarian
purpose of releasing the two Americans. On this basis, President Clinton
proceeded to make the logistical arrangements to go to North Korea to seek
the -- secure their release.

     In advance of departure, President Clinton did talk directly with the
families and with Vice President Gore, where they repeated his request
that he make this trip.
                                                  SF.
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763299 Date: 02/13/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763299 Date: 02/13/2016




     I should also point out that we in the administration, prior to
President Clinton making the trip, consulted directly with allies to
ensure that they understood what the trip was about and what it wasn't
about. Consistent with the humanitarian nature of the trip, we offered
President Clinton's good (inaudible) in pressing North Korea on
humanitarian concerns of other countries, including South Korean citizens
and abducted Japanese citizens.

     In advance of the departure, we also conferred with China and Russia
and our other partners in the six-party talks to make sure, again, as I
said, that they fully understood what the trip was and what it wasn't;
that they fully understood specifically the unofficial, humanitarian
character of the trip.

     As you all know by now, President Clinton and his party have left
North Korea. They're on their back to the United States. We've been in
touch with them. We can report that the two journalists are enormously
relieved and in seemingly very good health.

     And with that, Denis, I'd be glad to answer any questions as to what
we know about this and what we can tell folks about our efforts to date.

          Yes, when you say that you tested the idea with the North
Koreans repeatedly, do you mean there were direct talks between the U.S.
and North Korea or was that also conducted through an intermediary?

     SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: I don't want to get into the details
of how this has gone. I can tell you, though, that after the two
journalists in conversations with their family members indicated that
North Korean officials had told them that if President Clinton visited as
an envoy on a private mission that they would be released, that we,
through a variety of means, tested that proposition and to our
satisfaction were convinced that in fact the North Koreans would, in
response to President Clinton visiting Pyongyang would release the
journalists. I don't want to get into the details of exactly how we
communicated, the back and forth.

     I can tell you though that we became convinced through our contacts
that in fact this would be the result, and it was based don that that we
could advise President Clinton that his trip was likely to be successful.

     Q    Thank you very much. I just really wanted to take a step back
and look at policy overall to North Korea. How is it possible to maintain
that North Korea is deepening its isolation as a result of the nuclear
program when you just had this very high-level, albeit private, visit by a
former President of the United States? I know that you're insisting that
these are two wholly separate tracks, but doesn't it at least complicate
your message that North Korea is isolating itself still further?

     SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: We, in undertaking this project --
and I will tell you and we can tell you after talking to our colleagues
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763299 Date: 02/13/2016
     UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763299 Date: 02/13/2016




who were in Pyongyang over the last day, can tell you that we made clear
in every communication we had with the North Koreans, and President
Clinton made clear in all his conversations, that this was a purely
private humanitarian mission aimed solely at the release of the two
American journalists -- and that in fact was completely separate from
issues between North Korea and the international community. It was made
crystal clear, the separation here. That's point one.

     Point two is that the United States and its international partners
continue to pursue aggressively the goal of a verifiable denuclearized
Korean Peninsula. The United States -- and as you've seen over recent
weeks, having secured a new Security Council Resolution, 1874, fully
intends and has to successfully implement that resolution. You've seen a
number of instances -- a couple of instances of that in recent weeks and
we'll continue to implement that resolution vigorously.

     I have to tell you, as Secretary Clinton said after her trip to the
ASEAN meeting last week, that I don't know of a time when the Koreans have
been more isolated. I don't know of a time when there's been such
cooperation among the international community with respect to actual
implementation -- not just adoption, but implementation of an important
and tough U.N. resolution. And we will continue on that path.

     So I -- you know, it's just the facts. It's in the performance. So
it was both in the communications with North Korea about what this was and
what this wasn't, and we had one goal in mind, which was in the U.S.
interest, which was to seek to release of these two Americans. That's
what it was, and we've been very clear about what it wasn't. It in no way
indicates -- and we've been -- that's why I also wanted to underscore the
consultations that we had with allies before the mission to make sure we
were absolutely clear here as to what it was and what it wasn't. And it
wasn't in any way about our disagreements with the DPRK with respect to
its conduct or with respect to our intention to vigorously enforce the
resolution and to vigorously seek the denuclearization of the Korean
Peninsula.

             If I could follow up on that --

      SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: Sure, of course, go ahead, sorry.

          The other argument, of course, is that -- is there any
possibility that at a time when North Korea has indicated it may be
willing to get back to some kind of talks with the U.S., that this might
create a certain positive momentum by cooling tensions? Is there any
overlap in that sense?

     SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL:                Yes, we have indicated quite
clearly, in coordination with our partners in the six-party talks, that
the Koreans have two paths to consider here. They can consider the path
of provocative behavior, continuing to pursue their nuclear program, and
they will face deepening isolation. There's another path, which is they
actually, implement irreversibly the steps that they've agreed to implement
    UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763299 Date: 02/13/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763299 Date: 02/13/2016




to date, and that they can come back into talks. But the two paths are
quite clear here, and we feel that those paths remain in front of them.

     So, you know, to answer to your question directly, that's up to the
North Koreans, as it has been. Provocative behavior, continued pursuit of
the nuclear program, continued violation of U.N. Security Council
resolutions will result in their facing the kind of unified international
community isolation that they're facing at this moment. A path that says
that they re-embrace the irreversible denuclearization of the North Korean
Peninsula, and engage in a way that indicates the irreversible taking of
the steps that they've agreed to take in 2005 and beyond would put it on a
different path. That's our firm view going forward here, and it's up to
them.

            Thank you.

          Hi, there. I won't use your name, but nice to talk to you. Can
you tell us about the conversations between former President Clinton and
Kim Jong-il? I mean, to what degree did they discuss the nuclear
program? Who brought it up first? What can you tell us?

     SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: Margaret, I can't -- you know, we
don't have a detailed readout on exactly what happened. I can give you a
couple of things here, though.

     Number one, of course the principle discussion was around seeking the
release of the journalists. Point one.

     Point two, I can give you a couple of details which we've learned in
our conversation with the folks on the airplane before getting on the
phone with you all; that President Clinton and his team did engage in an
hour-and-fifteen-minute meeting with President Kim Jong-il this -- I guess
yesterday afternoon, right, and then had a dinner which lasted a little
over two hours. So the total amount of time that they were speaking -- or
in meetings or in dinners with each other was about a little over three
hours and 15 minutes. And I don't have a readout on the particulars of
what was discussed at this point.

            Was the nuclear issue at least discussed?

     SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: I don't know the answer to that
question, you know. President Clinton -- I'm sure he gave him -- I'm sure
President Clinton gave President Kim his views on denuclearization, and
his views are well known with respect to denuclearization.

     And President Clinton, as you know, Margaret, has a history here of
both being quite tough, where we went through some very serious episodes
with the North Koreans, as you know when you covered in the 1990s, but
also entered into agreements and with President Kim's father.

     And President Clinton's view on denuclearization and on the question
of whether or not pursuit of nuclear weapons will make the North Koreans
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. FÂ°-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763299 Date: 02/13/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763299 Date: 02/13/2016




safer or -- more safe or less safe are well known. But again I'd be
speculating at this point, given the short conversations we've had with
them to go beyond that.

     But I can tell you this, though, one other thing that one of my
colleagues just reminded me of here, is that in addition to discussing,
Margaret, the U.S. journalists, he also discussed and we know pressed very
hard -- and we heard this from our debrief, our short debrief from the
plane -- he did press very hard on the positive things that could flow
from the release of the South Korean detainees and entering into talks and
to really -- seeking the release of Japanese abductees. So I can tell you
with confidence that both those issues were raised.

          Good evening, gentlemen. Let me ask this. In this sequence of
events did President Obama speak either directly to former President
Clinton or Vice President Gore as this process moved along? And for a
while there was this sort of public spat between the North Korean
government and Secretary of State Clinton about her characterization of
North Korea's isolation and it I guess is maybe consistent with North
Korea's own behavior, but it just seems interesting that that kind of spat
would be going on while it appears, based on your timeline, that these
other very significant conversations were going on in back channels about
the release of these two journalists. Can you address both of those
issues?

     SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: I can, Major. With respect to
conversations that President Obama has had, former Vice President Gore has
been directly, vigorously, and constantly involved in trying to seek the
release of his colleagues at Current TV. And Vice President Gore has
been, as I said, pretty tireless in this effort, and I think if you talk
to the families of the two journalists they'll tell you that. And that
includes being in touch quite frequently with members of the United States
government -- and I do believe he did have at least one conversation with
President Obama. Point one.

     Point two on your question is that President Obama has not spoken to
President Clinton about this mission or about this issue. President
Clinton has had, as you would expect, conversations with members of the
national security team and in preparation -- well, two things: One, in
determining the bona fides of the offer -- that is, whether or not we
could assure him that if he undertook this visit, as I said earlier, that
in fact it would succeed, and we did tremendous amount of due diligence on
that, and we did talk to him obviously about that.

     And secondly, prior to his trip, he was -- as we would do with any
other prominent American undertaking such a trip, we did sit down with him
on two occasions, the last one being last Saturday at his residence in
Washington --

            Would these be face to face?


                                                   An
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763299 Date: 02/13/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763299 Date: 02/13/2016




     SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: Yes, absolutely. There were
telephone conversations, but there were at least two face-to-face
briefings, Major. One on the issue, as I said, of the bona fides of the
offer, but the second, as we would do with any prominent American or any
American who undertook such a trip, we did last Saturday. He did sit down
with members of the interagency team and experts on the Korean issue to
receive a briefing on the issues and on the current circumstance in
Korea. And that's, as I said, that last briefing took place at his
residence in Washington, D.C., last Saturday.

     Q      Last Saturday?

     SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: Yes.

     Q      And on the spat?

     SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: Remind me of the spat?

          Oh, the -- you'll remember, there was this kind of dialogue,
official commentary from the North Koreans comparing the Secretary of
State to a child or a young girl or a schoolgirl or something like that,
and it just seems odd that that kind of highly undiplomatic language was
going on at the same time it appears, based on your timeline, that very
high-level and intense back-channel diplomacy was going on about the two
journalists.

     SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: Yes, both those things were going on
at the same time. That's just a fact.

            Anything unusual or striking about that in your mind?

     SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: No, I just think, as I said earlier
to the question from the Financial Times, that we are engaged in an
effort, worked with the international community, with respect to the North
Korean nuclear program and other issues. And those efforts are important
and they continue. But we also had an effort underway to -- as we had
from March of 2009 -- an effort underway to seek the release of American
citizens, which we consider to be one of our obligations. And as you
know, we take that really seriously here.

            Very good, thank you.

     MR. McDONOUGH: Why don't we take one more?

          Hi. Can you just clear up whether there was an apology or sign
of contrition from former President Clinton towards the North Koreans as
the official media has reported? And how much of a sort of bounty do you
expect to receive in terms of the kind of intelligence the former
President was able to gather about the state of Kim Jong-il's health,
possible succession moves, and what's going on inside North Korea?


                                                   61
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763299 Date: 02/13/2016
   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763299 Date: 02/13/2016




     SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: With respect to the first question,
the answer is no. With respect to the second, I'm not going to comment on
that.

     MR. McDONOUGH: All right, everybody. Sure appreciate you getting on
the phone with us here and I'm sure we'll be in touch on this and other
issues. But let me just reiterate here in closing that this is a briefing
on background and we sure appreciate you're taking the time to be with us.

     SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: Thanks for your patience, everybody,
and I apologize for being so late.

                                                        END                                     11:1
0 P.M. EDT




   UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05763299 Date: 02/13/2016
